Words on the Condensed Essence of the Profound Path Having bowed with single-minded devotion To the master, the lord who pervades all families, I shall offer these words on the condensed essence of the profound path To nourish the practice of the faithful ones. This body we have obtained, Endowed with the eight freedoms and ten advantages, Is hard to find and serves a great purpose. Therefore, strive in the ways to extract its essence. Certain is its death. Uncertain is the time of death's arrival. When it comes, only Dharma will be of benefit. Therefore, vigorously practice the sublime doctrine right away. Since after our death Only our good and bad karma will follow us, Inscribe in your heart the commitment To always practice virtue and abandon evil. Wherever we are born in saṃsāra, There is unimaginable suffering. Therefore, with the desire to swiftly liberate Yourself and all other sentient beings from it, Seek refuge in the Triple Gem And generate bodhicitta in aspiration and action. Practice the yogas of the meditation and recitation of Vajrasattva to purify obscurations And maṇḍala offerings to gather the accumulations. Especially, and at all times, Vigorously practice the devotion of guru yoga, The method for realizing your innate primordial wisdom By swiftly connecting you with blessings. Visualize your master, embodiment of all sources of refuge, On the crown of your head on a lotus, sun, and moon; Make fervent supplication prayers, Receive the four empowerments, and mingle your mind with theirs. The key point for the body is to adopt Vairocana's sevenfold posture. The key point for the speech is to train in gentle breathing. The key point for the eyes is to unwaveringly gaze into space. The key point for the mind is to sever conceptual elaborations of the three times. If these are applied, thoughts relating to the past will cease, Thoughts relating to the future will not arise, And you will experience the present moment of awareness, A state beyond thought and description. The essence of awareness, in which clarity and emptiness are indivisible, Is itself the primordial abiding nature. Without making it more or less, Leave it as it is, unspoiled by contrived mentation. Whatever notions of perceived and perceiver arise from that state, They will subside in their own place Without mixing or grasping, Like the patterns of color in a clear crystal. By maintaining the continuity of that clarity and awareness At all times and under all circumstances, Conquer the citadel of the ultimate In the great state of non-meditation without distraction. In short, if you regard all appearances as the body of the deity, And all sounds as the vajra sound of secret mantras, And if your thoughts do not stir from the dharmadhātu, It is certain that you will accomplish the supreme siddhi in this life. Responding to the faithful ones' interest, I, the yogi Jigpa Mepe De, wrote this as it sprung to mind. By the virtue of that, May the primordial ground of liberation be revealed! 
